network --> Connection to one or more devices
or
when two or more communicating devices are connected to each other then a network is formed.
VOIP --> Voice over IP protocol
HTTP --> Hyper text transfer protocol
cluster of networks
submarine cables
intranet
internet is nothing but two or more service providers are connected to each other all over the world
VPN --> virtual private network
safe privacy
LAN ==> two or more communicating devices in a room, floor, building, campus. Cost does'nt matter.
MAN ==> two or more communicating devices connected to each other in same city. Cost does matter.
WAN ==> two or more communicating devices connected to each other within different city. Cost does matter.

OSI (Open system interconnection) reference model --> 7 layers
Physical Layer
Data Link Layer --> uses MAC Address(unique among all devices) 48 bits
Network Layer --> uses IP Address 32 bits
Transport Layer (TCP / UDP)

Why do we require mac Address and IP Address in computer network ?
List any 3 points you learn from that video ?

CSMACD --> Carrier sense multiple access collision detection

Back of period

Switch

we use switch on layer 2 for Interlan communication

we use router on layer 3 which uses IP Address

IP Addresses are divided into 2 parts:
Public Addresses and Private Addresses

Private Addresses 10.0.0.0/2.255.255.555

Private Addresses are reusable Addresses

Cisco Packet Tracer is a tool which is helping network engineer to trace the packet

Mask is indicating number of bits on network side

en
sh r
sh running-config
configure terminal
interface gigabitEthernet0/0
IP address 192.168.0.1 255.255.255.0
no shut
exit command is  used to go one step back
do show ip route

show IP route
do show IP route

Four types of memory in Router:
Flash
NV(Non volatile) ram  /  Startup configuration
ram / running configuration
rom

IOS in cisco is present in Flash

To save in NV ram we use right command and it is known as Startup configuration

> user mode
# privilege mode
(config)# global configuration mode

user mode and privilege mode are knows as monitoring mode

IP Packet
Source IP address is known as sender IP Address

Routing Table

Manually defining the destination is known as static Routing

we can achieve dynamic routing with the help of routing protocols

list down various routing protocol which are used in computer network ?
List down different network devices used by cisco and juniper ?
What are the different operating systems used by cisco and juniper ?

Routing protocol uses routing Table

Routing protocols are used to:
To learn about all the networks
To learn about all the paths to reach the network
To select the best path to reach that network

Interior gateway protocol (IGP) is used within the autonomous system
Exterior gateway protocol (EGP) is used when two different autonomous system wants to connect with each other

Border gateway protocol (BGP)

Routing protocols are as follows:
RIPv1 uses DVRP
RIPv2 uses DVRP
IGRP uses DVRP
EIGRP uses ADVRP
OSPS uses LSRP
ISIS uses LSRP
BGP uses DVRP

Behaviours:
Distance vector routing vector (DVRP)
Link state Routing protocol (LSRP)

Behaviours of Distance vector routing vector:
Updates are periodic forwarded after 30/90 sec.
Entire routing table is shared as a part of Updates
Updates are shared to the directly connected network
Since conversion is slow, black holes are formed.

Behaviours of Link set Routing protocol:
Triggered updates are shared to the connected networks
* Updates are Triggered they are not periodic
* Only new entry is shared
* Multicast to a group
Only the incremental change is shared to networks

LSDB Link state database
Routing Table

Routing Table has only best path to reach that destination.


In order to monitor on router use show keyword

fe0/0
first 0 --> slot
second 0 --> port

connection between a cisco hardware and computer we can use console port

With the help of output queue we can find how much the downloading and uploading is going  on

Router routes between the network
Switch switches within the network

different interface of your router should belong to different network

It is always necessary for router to have forward and reverse path

when you assign a ip address to router you can see C and L

Classfull addresses are addresses with default mask

classless addresses are addresses with any other mask but not the default mask

Troubleshooting steps:
whenever something is not working in your network first check your ip address
go to your device and check the security concerns.

DHCP --> Dynamic host configuration protocol

Ip address is assigned dynamically

DHCP configuration:
en
conf t
ip dhcp pool internship
network netid subnetmask
default-router
ip dhcp excluded-address 192.168.40.2

show ip dhcp pool

ping works on ICMP protocol and one of it's function is to let the user know one of the destination is reacheable or not.

Redundancy:

Single Point Of Failure (SPOF)
Fail Over
The traffic from active router should fail over to backup router/redundant router/passive router

Active to Back over --> Fail Over
Back over to Active --> Fail Back

Active to backup over routing protocol:
Redundancy Protocol (HSRP) Hot Standby Routing Protocol

In your HSRP configuration you make groups
virtual/Standby IP Address

In HSRP we configure virtual IP Address
In HSRP we create a virtual default IP Address

Virtual IP Address should also be set in default gateway of PC

Track

Access control list

When we do the inversion of subnet mask is knows as Wildcard mask.

Inbound interface are the interface

Outbound interface is the interface post processing of the packets.

Taking access on a router in such a way is known as Remote Access

For accessing remotely we use TELNET protocol
